---
title: "[TA] EDO"
collection: teaching
type: "TA, graduate course"
permalink: /teaching/2022-EDO
venue: "IMPA"
date: 2022-03-14
location: "Rio de Janeiro, Brazil"
---

This TA consists of one code class per week. The goal is to be able to code several methods to solve differential equations.

---

## FAQ

| Question | Answer |
| -- | - |
| Where? | Room 130 |
| When? | every Wednesday @ 10:30am (this may change) |
| Book? | Differential Equations (M. Viana and J.M. Espinar) |
| Book website? | [edo.impa.br](https://edo.impa.br/) |

---
## Classes

### Class 00

* Write a very simple Octave code to solve the equation x' = x(1-x) and the logistic equation using the Euler Method. See [Octave codes](/files/TAEDO/CLASS00/CLASS00.zip).

### Class 01

* Separate the code in two files, one with a general Euler Method to be used with any equation x' = F(t,x) and one with an example of use for the Lotka-Volterra equation. See [Octave codes](/files/TAEDO/CLASS01/CLASS01.zip).

### Class 02 (assignment)

* In section 2.6 of our book (page 62) the Picard method is introduced. It consists of an iterative method to locally solve a differential equation x'=F(x,y). The goal is to construct a sequence $(\gamma_n: (t_0-\varepsilon, t_0 + \varepsilon) \to \mathbb{R}^d)_{n=0}^\infty$ such that $\gamma_n$ converges uniformly (and exponentially fast) to a solution.
* The method stats with $\gamma_0(t) \equiv x_0$ and then we iterate $\gamma_{n+1}(t) = x_0 + \int_{t_0}^t F(s, \gamma_n(s)) ds$ for $n \geq 1$.
* A numerical method to solve Picard clearly depends on a numerical method to solve integrals. Two such methods are the rectangle rule and the trapezium rule (in the book). Better approximations can be achieved with the [1/3 Composite Simpson's rule](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simpson%27s_rule).
> The assignment tasks are: 
> - Read section 2.6 and the wiki page on Simpson's rule;
> - Create 3 .m files called *IntegralRectangleRule.m*, *IntegralTrapezoidalRule.m* and *IntegralSimpsonsRule.m*;
> - Each file must have a function
>> <code>function integral = IntegralSomethingRule(times, curve, F)
<br> # times is a list of times s (with n
 entries)
<br> # curve is a n by d matrix, the i-th row corresponds to the i-th time
<br> # F(s,x) is a real-valued function taking a real s and a d-dimensional vector x. 
</code>
>
> - Create another .m file called *IntegralExamples.m* giving examples of use for the 3 rules;

* Due date <strong>April 3rd, 2022</strong>. Send to [lucas.resende@impa.br](mailto:lucas.resende@impa.br) as a .zip or .rar file containing all 4 .m files (name it *YOURFULLNAME.zip* or *YOURFULLNAME.rar*, no spaces), as subject use *(YOURFULLNAME) - ASSIGNMENT: INTEGRATION RULES*.
* The assignment <strong>will not</strong> be evaluated, but I'll give feedback on your code. It is just a task to see how you are going. But I <strong>strongly</strong> encourage you to do it, since it is a good way to test your code skills up to now.
* See [Octave codes](/files/TAEDO/ASSIGNMENT_INTEGRATION/ASSIGNMENT_INTEGRATION.zip).

### Class 03

* Use the assignment to implement Picard method. See [Octave codes](/files/TAEDO/CLASS03/).

### Class 04

* Give and example of stiffness and implement Experiment 4.7 (page 146). See [Octave codes](/files/TAEDO/CLASS04/).

### Classes 05, 06 and 07

* Introduce algorithm time complexity using sort algorithms (implement bubblesort and quicksort).
* Introduce the concept of recursion (used on quicksort).
* Introduce the [Cooley–Tukey FFT algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cooley–Tukey_FFT_algorithm) and implement it using recursion.

### Class 08 (assignment)

* At the end of Class 07 we talked about how to use your FFT to solve partial differential equations. A simple method was presented, the Spectral method. A more general method the Pseudo-Spectral method (see [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rsdqvrldgHM)). This assignment is about both methods.
> The assignment tasks are: 
> - Watch the video;
> - Create 2 .m files called *FFT.m* and *IFFT.m* with your codes for the fast transform and its inverse;
> - Create a .m file called *RK.m* with your code for the classical 4th order Runge-Kutta method;
> - Create a .m file with a function that solves $\frac{\partial u}{\partial t} = a \frac{\partial u}{\partial x}$ for a constat $a \in \mathbb{R}$;
> - Create a .m file with a function that solves $\frac{\partial u}{\partial t} = a(x) \frac{\partial u}{\partial x}$ for a function;
> - For the last two functions you should assume that $x \in [0,1]$ and $t \in [0,T]$;
> - Plot the solutions for some choices of $a$ and $a(x)$;

* Due date <strong>May 11th, 2022</strong>. Send to [lucas.resende@impa.br](mailto:lucas.resende@impa.br) as a .zip or .rar (it is ok to send just the spectral method).
* During days 12 and 13 I'll conduct interviews about the code and the problem. I'll ask the following questions:
> - What is the complexity of your code in terms of its hyperparameters ($\Delta x$, $\Delta t$, ...)?
> - Can you adapt your code to solve equations like $\frac{\partial u}{\partial t} = a \frac{\partial^2 u}{\partial x^2}$?