---
title: "Contributions to Dynamic Analysis of Differential Evolution Algorithms"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2021-04-29-differential-evolution
excerpt: 'We study the Differential Evolution improvement probabilities to adress issues about its hyperparameters.'
date: 2021-04-29
venue: 'Evolutionary Computation'
paperurl: 'https://direct.mit.edu/evco/article-abstract/doi/10.1162/evco_a_00318/113819/Contributions-to-Dynamic-Analysis-of-Differential'
citation: 'Resende, Lucas, and Ricardo HC Takahashi. "Contributions to Dynamic Analysis of Differential Evolution Algorithms." Evolutionary Computation (2022): 1-32.'
---
The Differential Evolution (DE) algorithm is one of the most successful evolutionary computation techniques. However, the structure the successive application of its mutation, crossover and selection operators is not trivially translatable in terms of mathematical transformations that describe the evolution of population. In this work, analytical expressions are developed for the probability of enhancement of individuals after each application of a mutation operator followed by a crossover operation, in the case of a population distributed radially around the optimum for the sphere objective function, considering the DE/rand/1/bin and the DE/rand/1/exp algorithm versions. The expressions are employed for the analysis of DE population dynamics, explaining the emerging collective behaviors. The analysis is extended to more complex situations, reaching rather precise predictions of the effect of problem dimension and of the choice of algorithm parameters. Numerical experiments also suggest that when optimizing quadratic functions starting from arbitrary initial populations, the DE algorithm tends to produce intermediate populations that approximately follow the geometry of the function contour surfaces, giving rise to distributions that are approximately consistent with the idealized transformation of a radial population. This allows the usage of the analytical expressions in the asymptotic analysis of the population dynamics along the optimization process. It is also shown that the same procedure may hold in the optimization of smooth generic nonlinear functions, which have some region around the point of optimum in which the function behaves as a convex quadratic function.
